To investigate the impact of speed and directional persistence of breast cancer cells on tumor growth, we use a 2D stochastic cell-based model inspired by the persistence random walk model (38). However, besides cell migration, our model also accounts for other cellular processes including, proliferation, intravasation and cell death. 

The model is based on 8 main assumptions: i) Cells are individual active agents that, for simplicity, live in a 2D section. ii) Cell movement is characterized by a given speed and directionality. iii) The 2D tissue section receives nourishment from functional blood vessels that are assumed to be perpendicular to the tissue section. iv) Cells in the nourished zone adjacent to a functional blood vessel are more likely to proliferate faster and move within this zone than leave it. v) Cell division depends on several factors, including proximity to blood vessels, local cell density and the time since the division of the corresponding mother cell. vi) Cells that spend the G1 phase in the nourished zones can have a shorter cell cycle length. vii) Cells become necrotic and die if they are not able to divide due to lack of space after several cell cycles. Senescent cells are also considered. Those are cell that are in a transition state between a proliferating state and a total cell cycle arrest. They can shift back to proliferating state if the local cell density changes. viii) Cells moving towards blood vessel can intravasate.

The aforementioned assumptions were translated into a stochastic mathematical and computational model that is fully described and parameterized in the Supplementary Material. Briefly, cells are described as circular agents of a given diameter and their position is determined by the coordinates of the center of the circle in a 2D computational domain. Cells cannot overlap but they can cross each other during migration. Cell movement is simulated according to speed profiles computed following an empirical distribution. Cell’s directionality is determined in term of persistence ratios, which range between 0 and 1. A persistence ratio of 1 refers to a very persistent cell, which maintained a preferred overall direction of movements within bilateral 90 degrees. The probability of a cell to divide depends on the local cell density, the time since the division of the original agent and the proximity to a blood vessel. We assume that the proliferation rate is 30% higher in well-nourished spacious zones around cross-sections of blood vessels. The probability of undergoing cell division increases significantly when the optimal cell-cycle time is achieved. Additionally, cells are removed from the field to simulate i) cell death if a cell is not undergoing cell division after a number of cell-cycles because of lack of available space. ii) intravasation if a cell succeeded penetrating into the lumen. In our model, the ability of a cell to move, divide, intravasate and leave a well-nourished zone is a stochastic event. Such stochasticity is achieved by generating a uniform random number between 0 and 1 per cell per process per iteration. A process is triggered when the random number is equal to or less than the corresponding parameter value, representing the probability of the event to take place. Periodic boundary conditions were imposed to avoid losing cells going out of the simulation field.

In each simulation, which is characterized by certain speed and directional persistence, we account for the following outcomes: the number and distribution of cells in the 2D domain, the number of intravasating cells, the proliferation outcome and the mean time spent in the nourished zones. In this way we were able to estimate the optimal speed-persistence combination that leads to bigger tumors and more intravasation. We also use the model to study the pathological relevance of Golgi fragmentation in breast cancer. All the modeling simulations were implemented using the high-performance computing at Oslo University (Abel computer cluster). 

To run the simulations, both files ("Modeling_backend" & "Run_model") should be saved in the same working directory. Load the "Modeling_backend" in R and open the "Run_model" file and execute the code.
